---
layout: post
title: "Web Servers with Node.js feat. Tommy Tutone"
always_allow_html: yes
output: 
  md_document: 
    variant: gfm
    preserve_yaml: true
---

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Introduction

Today’s post focuses on some basic web development using Node.js.
Node.js (or “Node”) is a runtime environment for executing JavaScript
code outside of a server. It works very well for highly-scalable,
data-intensive and real-time applications. I started with [this
tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TlB_eWDSMt4&ab_channel=ProgrammingwithMosh)
from the [Programming with
Mosh](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCWv7vMbMWH4-V0ZXdmDpPBA) YouTube
channel. The tutorial does a great job of introducing Node and
installing all the software you need. I won’t attempt to replicate that
here. Instead, I am going to show some of the things I learned by
setting up a slightly amusing web server.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Creating a Web Server

I’ll start by creating a folder called “web-app” on my computer. Within
that, I’ll create a file called “app.js”, which I will then open in a
code editor (I use Atom on my Windows computer).

To create the web server, I am going to use Node’s HTTP module which can
be accessed by writing the following into the app.js file:

    const http = require('http');

Note that the object is being stored as a constant here, rather than a
variable. The tutorial mentions that this is best practice, as it
prevents the object from being over-written. If you were to store it as
a variable and then happen to define a variable also named “http” later,
it will over-write the initial variable.

Next, I need to create a server object, so I add a second line which
defines another constant that I create using “createServer” from HTTP.

    const http = require('http');
    const server = http.createServer();

Now whenever I run the application, I want the server to listen on port
8000 locally on my computer. I also want the console to log a message
that tells me the server is doing just that.

    const http = require('http');
    const server = http.createServer();
    server.listen(8000);
    console.log('Listening on port 8000');

If I switch over to the console, navigate to the “web-app” directory and
run “node app.js”, I see that the application is running just like I
told it to:

![](/images/listening.png)<!-- -->

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Picking Up the Phone

Alright, so now that the server is listening for connections, I want to
give it instructions for when someone actually connects. I can do that
by defining a request/response function for the server object:

    const http = require('http');

    const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
      if (req.url === '/') {
        res.write('Hello there!');
        res.end();
    });

    server.listen(8000);

    console.log('Listening on port 8000...');

What I’ve instructed the server to do upon a request (i.e. “if (req.url
=== ‘/’)”) is write the message “Hello there!” in response. Once I save
this change and restart the application in my console, I can head over
to a web browser and go to “localhost:8000”. Here is what I see:

![](/images/hellothere.png)<!-- -->

Cool right? It may be a little underwhelming considering all the amazing
web servers we are used to, but you have to start somewhere. I can also
add responses for other requests. Let’s say I want to create another
path on my server called “jenny”. And when users request that path they
receive a response that is an array of numbers. I hope the numbers make
you roll your eyes at my hilarious joke:

    const http = require('http');

    const server = http.createServer((req, res) => {
      if (req.url === '/') {
        res.write('Hello there!');
        res.end();
      }

      if (req.url === '/jenny') {
        res.write(JSON.stringify([8, 6, 7, 5, 3, 0, 9]))
        res.end()
      }
    });

    server.listen(8000);

    console.log('Listening on port 8000...');

If I head over to “localhost:8000/jenny” on my browser, I get:

![](/images/jenny.png)<!-- -->

You could say I now have Jenny’s number (sorry, but not really).

Mosh’s tutorial points out here that laying out separate
request/response pairs in this fashion quickly becomes inefficient. This
is a jumping off point for the Node framework Express.js. I will
definitely be digging into more of his tutorials soon. Thanks for
following along!

Side note: I was curious about the actual origin of “867-5309/Jenny” so
I went to its Wikipedia page. It was a moderately amusing
roller-coaster. You’re welcome.
